---
layout: post

title: Johney Stevens
tags:
- 5072
date: 2021-04-30
---

# Summary

Officer habitually lies on time cards, does not show up to work, and
generally neglects duties when actually in the office. Lying on time
cards is illegal and can be prosecuted.

Officer repeatedly failed to investigate use of force. Any use of
force reviewed by the officer should be questioned in light of
2017OPA-0259 and 2018OPA-0318. 

# 2015-1464
###### Nullifying Evidence, Incompetence

Officer violated SPD policy by forgetting to turn off the radio when
responding to an incident, thus tainting In-Car Video recordings.

# 2015OPA-0383

It is unclear from the current data set which named employee the
officer is in this OPA, but based on the reference in 2017OPA-1287, it
is likely either NE#1 or NE#2. OPA found that both employees falsified
time records. They were given training referrals.

# 2016OPA-0497
###### Nullifying Evidence, Incompetence

Officer failed to turn on In-Car Video when arriving on scene.

# 2017OPA-0259
###### Brutality, Incompetence, Deception

Officer failed to review use of force by subordinate. Subordinate
requested assistance twice, officer failed to respond twice. Officer
left work without directing subordinate in appropriate response to use
of force as directed by policy.

Officer's justification for failure to respond was that officer was
heading home, but officer was still on shift at the time of first
contact by subordinate.

"Based on Named Employee #1’s own statements, he had thus left work at least 30 minutes early and was driving home during his shift." - Page 3, Paragraph 6

This means the officer either lied about the officer's location at the
time of first contact, or was committing time sheet fraud at the time
of first contact. The latter is consistent with a pattern of fraud
that resulted in several other sustained OPA allegations.

"Notably, a review of the RMS system confirmed that while there was an
accident on the freeway consistent with what Named Employee #1
described, only one sergeant was logged into the event and that
sergeant did not log in until 1420 hours –nearly three hours after the
force was reported to Named Employee #1." - Page 3, Paragraph 7

OPA proved that SPD data directly conflicted with the officer's other
statements about first contact from the subordinate.

"The OPA Directorfurther notedthat, while not the fault of the
officer, the photographs did not properly document the injuries as
they failed to “allow verification of the identity of the person being
photographed” and were also entered into the DEMS system
incorrectly. (Lt. Drain Chain of Command Review.)" -Page 4, Paragraph 2

The deception and incompetence of the officer lead to the destruction
of use of force evidence.

# 2017OPA-0644
###### Deception, Incompetence, Possibly Illegal

"Named Employee #1 was previously counselled on his time keeping and
time usage after an OPA investigation." -Page 1, Executive Summary

"It is further alleged that he was not truthful in entering his time
on the electronic timesheets on at least one occasion." - Page 1,
Executive Summary

Officer failed to show up to shift, did not report several days off,
and showed up three hours late for work but didn't report being late
on time card.

"Had the Complainant not personally observed NE#1 arriving late for
work, this discrepancy would likely never have been discovered." -Page
2, Paragraph 7

Officer has been caught committing time sheet fraud multiple
times. Given that it is unlikely for this to be discovered, it's
likely something that occurs quite regularly.

"While I cannot conclusively determine that NE#1 was dishonest, I have
no such problem finding that his actions violated SPD Policy
5.001-POL-2. NE#1 violated SPD policy and, arguably, City of Seattle
law when he did not complete his timesheet accurately and when he took
leave without proper authorization." -Page 3, Paragraph 1

"NE#1 has repeatedly arrived late at work, failed to properly complete
his timesheet, and has not sought the necessary authorization for
leave time." -Page 3, Paragraph 4

OPA notes that the officer's time sheet fraud may have broken the law.

# 2017OPA-069
###### Incompetence

Officer was given nine opportunities to attend a required
training. Officer signed up for the very last one and then didn't show
up. It's impossible to tell if this is incompetence or intentionally
dodging an obligation.

# 2017OPA-1287
###### Incompetence, Possibly Illegal

Officer is caught committing time sheet fraud a few months
later. References 2015OPA-0383 (not included in current data set),
added to list.

After being reprimanded and put on a performance management plan to
address the behavior, the officer continued to take sick leave without
notifying supervisor. 

"NE#1 told OPA that his wife had a serious blood disorder that needed
to be monitored and could, depending on the circumstances, require
immediate hospitalization. NE#1 stated that on December 16 he did, in
fact, have to take his wife to the hospital. [...] NE#1 could not
verify the identity of the clerk that he spoke with and speculated
that she was one of the precinct’s “relief” clerks." -Page 2,
Paragraph 3

Officer had the phone number of supervisor, but claims to have called
precinct clerk instead. Officer's story was not confirmed and officer
could not identify clerk who was called.

Officer claims to have been taking spouse to the hospital. 

"The Complainant stated that he had further explained to NE#1 that
there were substantial resources within the Department that he could
avail himself of to the extent that he was undergoing personal or
familial difficulties. The Complainant recounted, however, that NE#1
indicated that he did not need such resources or services." -Page 2,
Paragraph 2

Within the context of other deception by the officer, it should be
noted that this claim does not appear to have been vetted. This
statement by NE#1 may actually conflict with the officer's
claim. There appears to have been no attempt by OPA to verify the
story.

# 2018OPA-0318 
###### Incompetence, Deception

Officer failed to review use of force, again. See
2017OPA-0259. Officer is demoted for incompetence and deception.

"At the discipline meeting in this matter, the Named Employee’s chain
of command identified that his assertion that he asked the officers to
screen this incident at the precinct due to an impending shift change
was inconsistent with the evidence." -Page 2, Administrative Note

"Complainant alleged that the use of force witness statement provided
by NE#1 was vague and potentially intentionally inaccurate." -Page 2,
Paragraph 2

"While at the precinct, the Witness Officer informed NE#1 that, even
though he had been informed by radio of a warrant, the Witness Officer
determined that no warrant existed."

